---
jurisdiction: India (Income-tax Rules, 1962 -- subordinate legislation under the Income Tax Act, 1961)
source: Income Tax Department, Ministry of Finance, Government of India -- official consolidated Rules PDF
source_url: incometaxindia.gov.in (user-uploaded PDF "Income-tax-Rules-1962_2026-04-01_05-44-55_6f86ac_en.pdf", 628 pages)
effective_date: rule inserted by the IT (Eighteenth Amdt.) Rules, 2016, w.e.f. 1-4-2017; sub-rule (9) substituted by the IT (Twenty-seventh Amdt.) Rules, 2022, w.r.e.f. 1-4-2022
tax_year: valid through FY2025-26 (AY 2026-27). From FY2026-27 onward see Rule 76 of the Income-tax Rules, 2026 (corpus/india/it-rules-2026-rule-76/2026-27.txt) -- the successor rule, and note the form number itself changes (Form No. 67 -> Form No. 44), not just the rule number.
retrieved_date: 2026-09-20
retrieval_method: located via pdftotext text search, confirmed by direct visual page-read of the rendered PDF page (word-for-word match, no discrepancy found).
verification_confirmed (2026-09-20): this file's source PDF (Income-tax Rules, 1962 consolidated export) is ~104MB, over this project's page-image tool's 100MB direct-access limit -- the same condition that caused the retrieval_method overstatement caught and fixed in corpus/india/it-act-section-44aa/2025-26.txt, -40b/, and -90/ on this same date. This file's claim was re-checked explicitly rather than assumed correct by association: the source page (p.588, containing Rule 128 in full) was split out with qpdf into a standalone ~184KB PDF and read directly as a rendered page image (not text-extraction). Word-for-word match against the text below -- no discrepancy found. This note closes the ambiguity flagged in the project's 2026-09-20 review (this file, unlike the four files above, had not stated whether the qpdf-split workaround was actually used).
why_curated: This is the actual procedural mechanism for claiming the Article 25 foreign tax credit in India -- Section 90 (corpus/india/it-act-section-90/2025-26.txt) gives the DTAA legal effect, and this rule is what operationalizes claiming a credit under it, including the Form No. 67 filing requirement referenced by the data model's `tax_computations.form67_required` column. Closes the gap flagged in docs/personas.md for Persona C.
key_points_for_persona_c: (1) Credit is the LOWER of Indian tax payable on the income and foreign tax paid on it -- sub-rule (5)(i); this matches Article 25(2)(a)'s cap already used in Persona C's reasoning, now with a curated domestic-law source for it, not just the treaty text. (2) Form No. 67 (a statement of foreign income and tax paid/deducted) must be filed, verified, per sub-rule (8)(i). (3) Deadline, per sub-rule (9): on or before the end of the assessment year relevant to the previous year the income was offered to tax, AND the return itself must have been filed within the section 139(1)/139(4) time limits. Missing this deadline is a real compliance/audit-risk-relevant fact this project's Phase 3 audit-risk meter could plausibly flag.
---

128. Foreign Tax Credit.

(1) An assessee, being a resident shall be allowed a credit for the amount of any foreign tax paid by him in a country or specified territory outside India, by way of deduction or otherwise, in the year in which the income corresponding to such tax has been offered to tax or assessed to tax in India, in the manner and to the extent as specified in this rule:

Provided that in a case where income on which foreign tax has been paid or deducted, is offered to tax in more than one year, credit of foreign tax shall be allowed across those years in the same proportion in which the income is offered to tax or assessed to tax in India.

(2) The foreign tax referred to in sub-rule (1) shall mean,-- (a) in respect of a country or specified territory outside India with which India has entered into an agreement for the relief or avoidance of double taxation of income in terms of section 90 or section 90A, the tax covered under the said agreement; (b) in respect of any other country or specified territory outside India, the tax payable under the law in force in that country or specified territory in the nature of income-tax referred to in clause (iv) of the Explanation to section 91.

(3) The credit under sub-rule (1) shall be available against the amount of tax, surcharge and cess payable under the Act but not in respect of any sum payable by way of interest, fee or penalty.

(4) No credit under sub-rule (1) shall be available in respect of any amount of foreign tax or part thereof which is disputed in any manner by the assessee: Provided that the credit of such disputed tax shall be allowed for the year in which such income is offered to tax or assessed to tax in India if the assessee within six months from the end of the month in which the dispute is finally settled, furnishes evidence of settlement of dispute and an evidence to the effect that the liability for payment of such foreign tax has been discharged by him and furnishes an undertaking that no refund in respect of such amount has directly or indirectly been claimed or shall be claimed.

(5) The credit of foreign tax shall be the aggregate of the amounts of credit computed separately for each source of income arising from a particular country or specified territory outside India and shall be given effect to in the following manner:-- (i) the credit shall be the lower of the tax payable under the Act on such income and the foreign tax paid on such income: Provided that where the foreign tax paid exceeds the amount of tax payable in accordance with the provisions of the agreement for relief or avoidance of double taxation, such excess shall be ignored for the purposes of this clause; (ii) the credit shall be determined by conversion of the currency of payment of foreign tax at the telegraphic transfer buying rate on the last day of the month immediately preceding the month in which such tax has been paid or deducted.

(6) In a case where any tax is payable under the provisions of section 115JB or section 115JC, the credit of foreign tax shall be allowed against such tax in the same manner as is allowable against any tax payable under the provisions of the Act other than the provisions of the said sections (hereafter referred to as the "normal provisions").

(7) Where the amount of foreign tax credit available against the tax payable under the provisions of section 115JB or section 115JC exceeds the amount of tax credit available against the normal provisions, then while computing the amount of credit under section 115JAA or section 115JD in respect of the taxes paid under section 115JB or section 115JC, as the case may be, such excess shall be ignored.

(8) Credit of any foreign tax shall be allowed on furnishing the following documents by the assessee, namely:-- (i) a statement of income from the country or specified territory outside India offered for tax for the previous year and of foreign tax deducted or paid on such income in Form No. 67 and verified in the manner specified therein; (ii) certificate or statement specifying the nature of income and the amount of tax deducted therefrom or paid by the assessee,-- (a) from the tax authority of the country or specified territory outside India; or (b) from the person responsible for deduction of such tax; or (c) signed by the assessee: Provided that the statement furnished by the assessee in clause (c) shall be valid if it is accompanied by,-- (A) an acknowledgement of online payment or bank counter foil or challan for payment of tax where the payment has been made by the assessee; (B) proof of deduction where the tax has been deducted.

(9) The statement in Form No. 67 referred to in clause (i) of sub-rule (8) and the certificate or the statement referred to in clause (ii) of sub-rule (8) shall be furnished on or before the end of the assessment year relevant to the previous year in which the income referred to in sub-rule (1) has been offered to tax or assessed to tax in India and the return for such assessment year has been furnished within the time specified under sub-section (1) or sub-section (4) of section 139: Provided that where the return has been furnished under sub-section (8A) of section 139, the statement in Form No. 67 referred to in clause (i) of sub-rule (8) and the certificate or the statement referred to in clause (ii) of sub-rule (8) to the extent it relates to the income included in the updated return, shall be furnished on or before the date on which such return is furnished.

(10) Form No. 67 shall also be furnished in a case where the carry backward of loss of the current year results in refund of foreign tax for which credit has been claimed in any earlier previous year or years.

Explanation.-- For the purposes of this rule "telegraphic transfer buying rate" shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in Explanation to rule 26.
