---
jurisdiction: India (Income Tax Act, 1961)
source: Income Tax Department, Ministry of Finance, Government of India -- official consolidated Act text
source_url: incometaxindia.gov.in (comprehensive consolidated Act PDF, filename "Income-tax-Act-1961_2026_2026-06-18_02-47-37_b9326c_en.pdf", user-uploaded)
effective_date: base section long-standing; sub-clause (1)(b) omitted, and the fifteen-lakh-rupee/deemed-residency provisions ((1A), Explanation 1(b), (6)(c)/(d)) are Finance Act 2020-era additions -- exact effective dates not further verified, not needed for the one-time use below.
tax_year: valid through FY2025-26 (AY 2026-27). The Income-tax Act, 2025's residency-test successor section has NOT been located or curated -- this file covers the 1961 Act only.
retrieved_date: 2026-09-20
retrieval_method: located via pdftotext text search, confirmed by direct visual page-read (qpdf-split excerpt of the source PDF, which exceeds the page-image tool's 100MB direct-access limit) -- no discrepancy found.
why_curated_and_scope_boundary: THIS FILE IS NOT WIRED INTO ANY COMPUTATION. Per ADR-017 (DECISIONS.md), residential status is an explicit out-of-scope INPUT for this project's v1 -- every persona simply states "India resident" as a given fact, and this project does not implement Section 6's residency-determination logic. This file exists solely so that one specific claim is citable: the one-time sanity check (below) confirming Persona C's stated facts (110 days in the US) are not self-contradictory with her being an Indian resident that year. Do not treat this file's presence as evidence that residency determination has been built -- it has not.
persona_c_sanity_check: Persona C (Meera) states 110 aggregate days present in the US in the relevant tax year, with the rest of her time implicitly in India (no third country mentioned). That leaves ~255 days in India, which comfortably clears the 182-day threshold in sub-clause (1)(a) on its own -- she is unambiguously resident under the most basic test, regardless of the 60-day/365-day alternative test in (1)(c), which becomes moot once (1)(a) is satisfied. Her premise holds. (Not checked: the further "not ordinarily resident" sub-classification in sub-clause (6), which affects how *foreign-source* income is taxed for NOR individuals -- not checked because sub-clause (6)'s own Explanation excludes "income derived from a business controlled in or a profession set up in India" from "income from foreign sources," and Meera's US-client income is exactly that -- income from her India-based consultancy profession, not foreign-source investment-type income -- so the NOR distinction would not change her position even if reached.)
---

6. Residence in India.

For the purposes of this Act,--

(1) An individual is said to be resident in India in any previous year, if he-- (a) is in India in that year for a period or periods amounting in all to one hundred and eighty-two days or more; or (b) [***]; or (c) having within the four years preceding that year been in India for a period or periods amounting in all to three hundred and sixty-five days or more, is in India for a period or periods amounting in all to sixty days or more in that year.

Explanation 1.-- In the case of an individual,-- (a) being a citizen of India, who leaves India in any previous year as a member of the crew of an Indian ship as defined in clause (18) of section 3 of the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 (44 of 1958), or for the purposes of employment outside India, the provisions of sub-clause (c) shall apply in relation to that year as if for the words "sixty days", occurring therein, the words "one hundred and eighty-two days" had been substituted; (b) being a citizen of India, or a person of Indian origin within the meaning of Explanation to clause (e) of section 115C, who, being outside India, comes on a visit to India in any previous year, the provisions of sub-clause (c) shall apply in relation to that year as if for the words "sixty days", occurring therein, the words "one hundred and eighty-two days" had been substituted and in case of such person having total income, other than the income from foreign sources, exceeding fifteen lakh rupees during the previous year, for the words "sixty days" occurring therein, the words "one hundred and twenty days" had been substituted.

Explanation 2.-- For the purposes of this clause, in the case of an individual, being a citizen of India and a member of the crew of a foreign bound ship leaving India, the period or periods of stay in India shall, in respect of such voyage, be determined in the manner and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed.

(1A) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (1), an individual, being a citizen of India, having total income, other than the income from foreign sources, exceeding fifteen lakh rupees during the previous year shall be deemed to be resident in India in that previous year, if he is not liable to tax in any other country or territory by reason of his domicile or residence or any other criteria of similar nature.

Explanation.-- For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that this clause shall not apply in case of an individual who is said to be resident in India in the previous year under clause (1).

(2) A Hindu undivided family, firm or other association of persons is said to be resident in India in any previous year in every case except where during that year the control and management of its affairs is situated wholly outside India.

(3) A company is said to be a resident in India in any previous year, if-- (i) it is an Indian company; or (ii) its place of effective management, in that year, is in India.

Explanation.-- For the purposes of this clause "place of effective management" means a place where key management and commercial decisions that are necessary for the conduct of business of an entity as a whole are, in substance made.

(4) Every other person is said to be resident in India in any previous year in every case, except where during that year the control and management of his affairs is situated wholly outside India.

(5) If a person is resident in India in a previous year relevant to an assessment year in respect of any source of income, he shall be deemed to be resident in India in the previous year relevant to the assessment year in respect of each of his other sources of income.

(6) A person is said to be "not ordinarily resident" in India in any previous year if such person is-- (a) an individual who has been a non-resident in India in nine out of the ten previous years preceding that year, or has during the seven previous years preceding that year been in India for a period of, or periods amounting in all to, seven hundred and twenty-nine days or less; or (b) a Hindu undivided family whose manager has been a non-resident in India in nine out of the ten previous years preceding that year, or has during the seven previous years preceding that year been in India for a period of, or periods amounting in all to, seven hundred and twenty-nine days or less; or (c) a citizen of India, or a person of Indian origin, having total income, other than the income from foreign sources, exceeding fifteen lakh rupees during the previous year, as referred to in clause (b) of Explanation 1 to clause (1), who has been in India for a period or periods amounting in all to one hundred and twenty days or more but less than one hundred and eighty-two days; or (d) a citizen of India who is deemed to be resident in India under clause (1A).

Explanation.-- For the purposes of this section, the expression "income from foreign sources" means income which accrues or arises outside India (except income derived from a business controlled in or a profession set up in India) and which is not deemed to accrue or arise in India.
