---
jurisdiction: India (Income Tax Act, 1961)
source: Income Tax Department, Ministry of Finance, Government of India -- official consolidated section text (letterhead PDF export from the Department's own Income Tax Act portal), as supplied by the user
source_url: incometaxindia.gov.in (Income Tax Act section-lookup tool; exact per-section URL not captured -- the user supplied the PDF export directly)
effective_date: base section -- AY 2017-18 onward; amended threshold provisos (Rs. 50L base / Rs. 75L when cash receipts <=5%) -- 1 April 2024 (AY 2024-25 / FY 2023-24 onward), per the Finance Act 2023 amendment
tax_year: currently applicable for FY 2023-24 (AY 2024-25) through the present (FY 2025-26 / AY 2026-27), pending any later amendment
retrieved_date: 2026-09-17
retrieval_method: Read directly from the user-supplied PDF (Income Tax Department's own official per-section export, already reflecting the amended text) -- transcribed visually, not passed through WebFetch's summarizing model. This supersedes the previous version of this file, which combined an Indian Kanoon WebFetch extraction (base text) with a separate Finance Bill WebFetch extraction (amendment) and carried an unresolved reliability caveat as a result.
correction_from_previous_version: The proviso wording is corrected here -- "Provided that in case of an assessee where the amount..." (per the official Department text) rather than "Provided that where the amount..." (the earlier WebFetch-derived wording, which dropped "in case of an assessee"). Substance is unchanged; only the earlier version's proviso opening phrase was inexact.
note_on_finance_act_2023_pdf: The user also supplied a copy of "Finance Act, 2023" (gstcouncil.gov.in mirror) intending to verify Clause 17 (the amending clause) directly. That PDF turned out to be a partial 10-page extract that jumps from gazette-printed page 1 straight to page 56 (Customs Act amendments) -- it omits the entire Income-tax Act chapter (roughly pages 2-55), including Clause 17. It was NOT usable for this verification. This is not a problem in practice, because the Income Tax Department's own official consolidated section text (used for this file) already incorporates the amendment and is a more authoritative source for the *current* text than the amending clause would be on its own -- but if bare Clause 17 text is ever needed (e.g. to see the amendment in isolation from the base section), a complete copy of the Gazette-published Finance Act, 2023 (No. 8 of 2023) would need to be sourced separately.
known_discrepancy_resolved: An earlier version of this file flagged that the main incometaxindia.gov.in bare-act page showed only the pre-amendment Rs. 50 lakh threshold. That discrepancy is now resolved: the Department's own current per-section export (this file's source) shows the amended Rs. 75 lakh conditional threshold, confirming the amendment is in force and the earlier stale page was simply an outdated snapshot.
---

44ADA. Special provision for computing profits and gains of profession on presumptive basis.

(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in sections 28 to 43C, in case of an assessee, being an individual or a partnership firm other than a limited liability partnership as defined under clause (n) of sub-section (1) of section 2 of the Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008 (6 of 2009), who is a resident in India, and is engaged in a profession referred to in sub-section (1) of section 44AA and whose total gross receipts do not exceed fifty lakh rupees in a previous year, a sum equal to fifty per cent of the total gross receipts of the assessee in the previous year on account of such profession or, as the case may be, a sum higher than the aforesaid sum claimed to have been earned by the assessee, shall be deemed to be the profits and gains of such profession chargeable to tax under the head "Profits and gains of business or profession":

Provided that in case of an assessee where the amount or aggregate of the amounts received during the previous year, in cash, does not exceed five per cent of the total gross receipts of such previous year, this sub-section shall have effect as if for the words "fifty lakh rupees", the words "seventy-five lakh rupees" had been substituted:

Provided further that for the purposes of the first proviso, the receipt of amount or aggregate of amounts by a cheque drawn on a bank or by a bank draft, which is not account payee, shall be deemed to be the receipt in cash.

(2) Any deduction allowable under the provisions of sections 30 to 38 shall, for the purposes of sub-section (1), be deemed to have been already given full effect to and no further deduction under those sections shall be allowed.

(3) The written down value of any asset used for the purposes of profession shall be deemed to have been calculated as if the assessee had claimed and had been actually allowed the deduction in respect of the depreciation for each of the relevant assessment years.

(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing provisions of this section, an assessee who claims that his profits and gains from the profession are lower than the profits and gains specified in sub-section (1) and whose total income exceeds the maximum amount which is not chargeable to income-tax, shall be required to keep and maintain such books of account and other documents as required under sub-section (1) of section 44AA and get them audited and furnish a report of such audit as required under section 44AB.
