---
jurisdiction: India (Income-tax Act, 2025 [No. 30 of 2025])
source: user-uploaded PDF "Income_Tax_Act_2025_as_amended_by_FA_Act_2026.pdf" (686 pages) -- appears to be an Income Tax Department-style consolidated export of the new Act as amended by the Finance Act, 2026
effective_date: 1 April 2026 (the Income-tax Act, 2025 repeals and replaces the Income-tax Act, 1961 from this date)
tax_year: FY2026-27 (the Act's own "Tax Year" terminology) onward. FY2025-26 and earlier remain governed by the 1961 Act -- see corpus/india/it-act-section-44ada/2025-26.txt.
retrieved_date: 2026-09-17
retrieval_method: located via pdftotext text search (to find the page), then confirmed by direct visual page-read of the rendered PDF pages (not text-extraction alone) -- consistent with this project's standard for legally load-bearing text.
verification_confirmed (2026-09-20, cont.): the 686-page source PDF was re-supplied and is only ~3.1MB -- well under the page-image tool's 100MB limit, unlike the 1961 Act and Rules-1962 PDFs that caused the overstatement problem elsewhere. Re-checked via genuine direct visual page-image read (not pdftotext) as part of closing the ambiguity flagged in the 2026-09-20 review. Word-for-word match against the text below -- no discrepancy found.
relation_to_1961_act: This section consolidates the three separate presumptive-taxation provisions of the 1961 Act -- Section 44AD (general business), Section 44AE (goods carriage), Section 44ADA (specified professions) -- into a single section with one table having three rows. Row 3 ("Specified profession") is the direct successor to Section 44ADA and is unchanged in substance for the project's purposes: 50% of gross receipts (or higher if claimed), same Rs. 50,00,000 / Rs. 75,00,000 (cash <=5%) thresholds.
key_finding: sub-section (5)'s partner-remuneration carve-out is explicitly scoped to "Table: Sl. No. 2" only (goods carriage -- the 44AE successor). It does NOT extend to Sl. No. 1 (general business, the 44AD successor) or Sl. No. 3 (specified profession, the 44ADA successor). This was checked directly against the 1961 Act (see corpus/india/it-act-section-40b/2025-26.txt's supporting comparison) and found to be a faithful continuation of the existing 44AD/44AE/44ADA asymmetry, not a drafting anomaly introduced by the new Act. Reinforces Persona E's conclusion under both Acts.
cross_reference_anomaly (2026-09-20, confirmed genuine, not a transcription error): both sub-section (5) (the partner-remuneration carve-out) and sub-section (7) (the lock-out-on-inconsistent-declaration rule) refer to "the income computed under sub-section (1)" -- but sub-section (1) only disapplies sections 26-54, it doesn't compute anything; the actual computation happens in sub-section (2)'s Table. Visually confirmed on the source page image, not a curation typo. Likely inherited verbatim from 1961 Act Section 44AE(3)'s identical phrasing, where "sub-section (1)" is correct because 44AE's own income figure IS computed in its sub-section (1) -- the cross-reference apparently wasn't updated when the three old sections were consolidated into Section 58's different sub-section numbering. Doesn't change any persona's conclusion (which sub-section computes the figure is unambiguous from context either way), but worth noting alongside this file's other cross-Act drafting-trap observations.
profession_list_change: sub-section (11)(a)(iii) and Section 62(4) (corpus/india/it-act-2025-section-62/2026-27.txt) define "specified profession" for this Act -- the named list now explicitly includes "information technology" and "company secretary", which were not named in the 1961 Act's Section 44AA(1). Relevant to Persona A (IT consultant) and Persona F (still not covered under either Act).
schema_v1_doc_id: india-2025-sec-58
schema_v1_jurisdiction: IN
schema_v1_legal_instrument: Income-tax Act, 2025 [No. 30 of 2025]
schema_v1_section_ref: 58
schema_v1_tax_year_start: 2026-27
schema_v1_tax_year_end: null
schema_v1_effective_from: 2026-04-01
schema_v1_effective_to: null
schema_v1_retrieval_method: visual_page_read
schema_v1_visually_confirmed: true
schema_v1_ambiguous_fields: none
---

Special provision for computing profits and gains of business or profession on presumptive basis in case of certain residents.

58. (1) The provisions of sections 26 to 54, to the extent contrary to this section, shall not apply to the manner of computation of profits and gains of the specified business or profession in sub-section (2).

(2) The profits and gains of any specified business or profession as mentioned in column B of the Table below, carried on by an assessee specified in column C of the said Table, having total turnover or gross receipts of business or profession during the tax year specified in column D and computed in the manner specified in column E thereof, shall be deemed to be the profits and gains of such business or profession chargeable to tax under the head "Profits and gains of business or profession".

TABLE

Sl. No. 1 -- Specified business or profession: "Any business other than the business specified against serial number 2." -- Assessee: "Eligible assessee." -- Total turnover or gross receipts during tax year: "(a) Does not exceed two crore rupees; or (b) does not exceed three crore rupees, where the amount or aggregate of amounts received, in cash, does not exceed 5% of the total turnover or gross receipts." -- Manner of computation: "(A) The aggregate of -- (i) 6% of total turnover or gross receipts which is received by specified banking or online mode during the tax year or before the due date specified in section 263(1) in respect of that tax year; (ii) 8% of total turnover or gross receipts as reduced by the turnover or gross receipts covered in (i); or (B) profit claimed to have been actually earned, whichever is higher."

Sl. No. 2 -- Specified business or profession: "Business of plying, hiring or leasing goods carriage." -- Assessee: "An assessee, who owns not more than ten goods carriages at any time during the tax year." -- Manner of computation: "(A) The aggregate of income from goods carriage: (i) being a heavy goods vehicle, calculated at the rate of Rs. 1000 per ton of gross vehicle weight or unladen weight, as the case may be, for each vehicle, for every month or part of a month during which such vehicle is owned by the assessee in the tax year; (ii) being a vehicle other than heavy goods vehicle, calculated at the rate of Rs. 7,500 for each goods carriage for every month or part of a month during which the vehicle is owned by the assessee in the tax year; or (B) profit claimed to have been actually earned, whichever is higher."

Sl. No. 3 -- Specified business or profession: "Specified profession as referred to in section 62(4)." -- Assessee: "Specified assessee." -- Total turnover or gross receipts during tax year: "(a) Does not exceed fifty lakh rupees; or (b) does not exceed seventy-five lakh rupees, where the amount or aggregate of amounts received in cash does not exceed 5% of the gross receipts." -- Manner of computation: "50% of the gross receipts or profit claimed to have been actually earned, whichever is higher."

(3) Any assessee mentioned in column C of the Table in sub-section (2), who claims that -- (a) the profits or gains actually earned from the specified business or profession are lower than the profits or gains computed in the manner mentioned in column E of the said Table; and (b) whose total income exceeds the maximum amount which is not chargeable to tax, shall be required to -- (i) keep and maintain such books of account and other documents as required under section 62; and (ii) get the accounts audited and furnish a report of such audit as required under section 63.

(4) Any loss, allowance or deduction allowable under the provisions of this Act, shall not be allowed against the income computed in the manner specified in sub-section (2).

(5) For the purposes of sub-section (2) (Table: Sl. No. 2), where the assessee is a firm, the salary and interest paid to its partners shall be deducted from the income computed under sub-section (1) subject to the conditions and limits specified in section 35(e).

(6) The written down value of any asset used for the purposes of specified business or profession shall be computed as if the assessee mentioned in column C of the Table in sub-section (2) had claimed and was actually allowed deduction in respect of depreciation thereon for each of the relevant tax years.

(7) Where an eligible assessee declares profit for any tax year as per the provisions of sub-section (2) (Table: Sl. No. 1) and he declares profit for any of the five tax years succeeding such tax year in contravention of the provisions of sub-section (1), then he shall not be eligible to claim the benefit of the provisions of this section for five tax years subsequent to the tax year in which the profit has not been declared as per the provisions of the said sub-section.

(8) Irrespective of anything contained in foregoing provision of this section, where provisions of sub-section (7) are applicable to an eligible assessee and his total income exceeds the maximum amount which is not chargeable to income-tax, he shall be required to keep and maintain such books of account and other documents as required under section 62 and get them audited and furnish a report of such audit as required under section 63.

(9) For the purposes of sub-section (2) (Table: Sl. Nos. 1 and 3), the receipt of amount or aggregate of amounts by a cheque drawn on a bank or by a bank draft, which is not account payee, shall be deemed to be the receipt in cash.

(10) The provisions of sections 62 and 63 shall not apply in so far as they relate to the business referred to in sub-section (2) (Table: Sl. No. 2) and in computing the monetary limits under those sections, the gross receipts or, as the case may be, the income from the said business shall be excluded.

(11) For the purposes of this section, --

(a) "eligible assessee" means an individual, a Hindu undivided family, or a firm other than a limited liability partnership, who is resident in India, and who -- (i) [omitted by the Finance Act, 2026, w.e.f. 1-4-2026]; (ii) has not claimed any deduction under Chapter VIII-C for the relevant tax year; (iii) does not carry on specified profession as defined in section 62(4); (iv) does not earn any income in the nature of commission or brokerage; (v) does not carry on any agency business;

(b) "specified assessee" means an individual or a firm, other than a limited liability partnership, who is a resident in India;

(c) "limited liability partnership" shall have the same meaning as assigned to it in section 2(1)(n) of the Limited Liability Partnership Act, 2008 (6 of 2009);

(d) the expressions "goods carriage", "gross vehicle weight" and "unladen weight" shall have the same meaning as respectively assigned to them in section 2 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 (59 of 1988);

(e) "heavy goods vehicle" means any goods carriage, the gross vehicle weight of which exceeds 12,000 kilograms; and

(f) an assessee, who is in possession of a goods carriage, whether taken on hire purchase or on instalments and for which the whole or part of the amount payable is still due, shall be deemed to be the owner of such goods carriage.
